this is what happened more or less the
magical girl Trope of anime hit a fever
pitch in the 1990s with the
international phenomenon of Sailor Moon
which typified the style both in homage
and parody these tropes have been
recreated by artists ever since and have
also become an entire genre in their own
right whether it's newer magical girls
like P maim Madoka Maga the westernized
magical girls like the cast of Shira and
the princesses of power or the
genderbent magical boys of cute high
Earth Defense Club the Trope has been a
staple of animation for decades but none
to my knowledge have been more discussed
and dissected than the 1997 series
revolutionary girl utena created by
bapas a production group formed by
director ikuhara kunihiko saoo hasaa
enokido Yoji and uro yiro so let's dive
into into the mesmerizing world of
Kara's creative Journey you see back in
the 9s iohara graced toi animation with
his presence during the production of
the Beloved Sailor Moon series he
co-directed the second season Sailor
Moon R alongside sat yichi and took the
helm as the sole director for both the
animated film Sailor Moon R the movie
and the third season Sailor Moon s but
Yahara grew Restless in the confines of
adapting existing Works longing for some
creative control thus after the
conclusion of Sailor Moon s in 1995 he
set forth on a quest to birth an
original series in this endeavor he
assembled the illustrious bapas a
Consortium of creative talents from
anime and manga you see bapas had quite
the history together hasawa and enokido
had previously joined forces with ukara
on Sailor Moon where enokido penned many
episodes featuring the iconic Sailor
Uranus and Sailor Neptune Bap Papas had
also lent their talents to the esoteric
Neon Genesis Evangelion as for syo she
was a seasoned manga artist who had not
yet ventured into the realm of anime now
initially iohara envisioned utena as a
mainstream showjoe series hoping to ride
the coales of Sailor Moon's commercial
success in fact they began with a
concept titled revolutionary girl utena
kiss featuring a group of valiant female
warriors known as the Neo elanar
Eleganza
Extravaganza battling the enigmatic end
of the world but as the creativity
flowed they settled on a different path
a romantic action show starring a pretty
girl who wears boys clothes the school
setting was a Cornerstone of anime but
other elements like the duels and the
Mysterious Rose rde were yet to enter
the plot as bapas commenced their
six-month planning phase after syo's
arrival they delved into the
nitty-gritty of the story World building
and the intricate process of translating
syo's visual style into anime in
parallel Sao embarked on creating a
manga adaptation of aenna while still
contributing her expertise to the
anime's development now a fascinating
tidbit here is that while lutena
inevitably carries Echoes of Princess
Knight and the rose of versailes to shjo
manga series known for their
crossdressing sword fighting heroins
ikuhara was persistently apprehensive
about being seen merely as a parody of
these iconic works sitto on the other
hand was brought in to be Papas
primarily because the team wanted a
female perspective to avoid
unintentionally parodying Shojo manga
Shojo manga is manga that's aimed at
Young Girls by the way fast forward to
1996 with syo's manga adaptation of
utena underway negotiations for the
broadcast of the utena anime were
finally sealed and production began in
Earnest bapas took the Reigns of
production with the esteemed JC staff
handling animation duties but here's
where the story takes a Twist iohara
vision for utena underwent a profound
transformation once the series commenced
production no longer content with aiming
for Mass Market success he decided to
infuse the series with a unique
non-commercial identity this shift saw
the incorporation of avangard elements
such as theatrical inspired layouts
Shadow plays that offer commentary on
each episode's events and the
experimental Coral compositions of Ja
Cesar as production Advanced tensions
simmered within bopus the series veered
away from its original commercial
trajectory creating what agoro described
as a tug-of-war between Sao and ukara
Sao ardently championed the initial
romantic concept for Anna over ikuhara
increasingly esoteric Vision they even
reached a point where they didn't speak
to each other for 3 months straight
sao's concern you see was not
ideological but pragmatic she believed
the mainstream shjo audience might not
Embrace anything other than a
traditional male female romance iohara
however kept the full extent of his
intended same-sex romance between utena
and anthy Under Wraps throughout most of
the production ultimately syto supported
the way the series handled the
relationship between the characters
nothing succeeds like success since then
revolutionary girl lutena has garnered A
Chorus of Praise both at home in Japan
and across the International stage for
all that Sailor Moon takes the Lion
Share of public discussion utena's
influence can be felt in the development
of anime to this very day in 1997 the
series won the coveted animation Kobe
award for the best television category
and as the years rolled on in 2017 NHK
the network behind utena conducted a
national poll to determine the 100
greatest anime in commemoration of the H
100th an iversary of the medium in which
utena placed 19th utena has graced
multiple best of lists with his presence
anime Insider hailed it as one of the
top 10 best anime ever writer Mike tulle
in his review declared the series to be
the most important anime of the
9s however with all this hype about
it what is revolutionary girl
utena actually about get comfortable
because that's not an easy question to
answer and things get
[Music]
weird revolutionary girl lutena is
divided into three sagas the student
council Saga the Black Rose Saga and The
climactic akori Saga or the apocalypse
Arc depending upon the release uten
atenu is a middle school student and
it's very very important to remember
that she's a middle school student
throughout the series and the movie to
say that she struggles to keep up good
grades is UN fair to her because she
doesn't really seem to care about that
stuff or anything that is in sports or
her friends she is as we would describe
a tomboy and a subject of simultaneous
jealousy Fascination and desire from
almost everyone in the school as a child
utena lost both of her parents in an
undescribed accident she managed to pull
herself together due to a quote unquote
chance encounter with an individual she
described as a prince he gave her a rose
engraved Signet ring with the promise
that it would help them meet again in
the future though she admits her memory
on this is a bit foggy she doesn't even
quite remember what her prince looked
like probably not what this Prince was
intending utena didn't fall madly in
love with him per se though she has
lived out her youth in anticipation of
one day meeting him instead she decides
that she will one day also become a
prince like him to save the imperil
princesses of the world just as the rose
Prince had once saved her as an audience
you really don't have any idea how
important this is until like the last
five episodes maybe even the last two
until then it simply seems to be a
backstory that drives utena to enroll in
the prestigious and exclusive otori
Academy there she is the source of
Wonder for the girls a source of Envy
for all the boys and a source of
confusion for all the teachers she acts
and dresses like a boy and is noted for
her Fierce sense of justice and
dignified nobility spying a shy and
reclusive anthy Hima being slapped by
her boyfriend she intervenes on what she
believes is anthy's behalf oh I
challenge you to a duel anthy is a piece
in a very complicated game of chess that
focuses around this school's enigmatic
student council this befits a beloved
anime Trope of the high school student
council holding a position of political
power that can rival a small government
anthy has a secret double life as the
rose bride and the student council is so
interested in her because the rosebride
is the key to unlocking a power that can
revolutionize the world the one who is
engaged to the rosebride can access this
power and bring about Revolution
presumably to suit their own whims the
rose bride becomes engaged to whomever
can best her current betroth in a duel
utena wins a duel with the student
council vice president to stop him from
hitting anthy so utena becomes anthy's
New Groom to be just works like that and
this makes sense compared to everything
that follows it don't worry it gets
weirder the key to these duels are the
Signet Rings which at present only
members of the student council wear the
student council is
not pleased that they've lost their
ability to shape the world of the future
and seek to get anthy back from utena
with the help or perhaps at the whim of
a mysterious benefactor codenamed end of
the world the Japanese version is more
clearly translated to apocalypse I'm
told but was not used in English because
of the apparent close ties to religious
overtones nomy you like girls more than
boys yes listen nomy God created men and
women for a reason reason that reason
being that they join in the best sort of
way no matter how good something may
feel going against God's plan what are
you implying Big Brother you know you're
the only one that I
love utena threw her close connection
and apparent engagement to Ane works at
coaching Ane to think for herself an
unfortunate drawback of the rosebride is
that the rosebride can only ever do or
feel the way that she is instructed to
by her betrothed even as her bridegroom
utna tirelessly coaches anthy to
advocate for her own needs and her own
feelings and to do what she wants rather
than what her magical husband person to
be tells her I'm sure tops of all
genders can identify with both the irony
and endless struggle of trying to coax
their bottoms into being less
subservient in the first Arc we see the
various reasons that the members of the
student council would want to use the
power of Revolution her winning streak
against all of them is brought to an end
when the student council president toga
tricks utena into believing that he is
the Rose Prince from her childhood
though after utena finds her courage
again she defeats him handedly the first
Arc is privy to a number
of oddities outside of the premise of
dueling in the upside down floating
Castle in the Sky where eternity lies
with the power to bring Revolution to
the world toa's younger sister nmy seems
to have a bit of a complex like a very
strong fixation that by far
exceeds protective but don't worry it
does get
weirder the first Arc does a lot of the
heavy lifting in terms of establishing
the rules of the world and the themes
running through the whole series
subsequent plot arcs just get deeper and
more unsettling truth be told the second
Arc doesn't really do much to elaborate
on the plot though it is important for
establishing some guiding mechanics of
this world as well as introducing some
key players for the ongoing series
through a plot divised to kill the rose
bride and replace her we see a
recurrence of the same weapons the
student council used to challenge and
Jenna we had seen the sword of dios a
powerful weapon and the key to the power
of Revolution being removed from anthy's
chest in her capacity as the rosebride
and this seems to be her primary role as
the rosebride just as anthy's body hosts
the sword of dios initially each student
council member hosts their own blade in
the third Arc however anony no longer is
host to the sword of dios instead she
draws a blade from utena's body that's
important keep that in mind we get to it
later the other primary element of the
second Arc is introducing anthy's
brother AIO and hey if you thought nomy
and toga stuff was a little weird we got
a couple episodes into the second Arc
with AIO and Ane and like yeah they're
uh
yeah anthy come
here I really don't want another content
strike from YouTube I already have one
so as graphic as this is I am simply
going to to euphemize and refer to it as
domestic abuse Akio is the principal
villain of the series and was both end
of the world as well as the rose prince
who gave utena her ring which drawing a
parallel to utena's duel with toga
akio's primary objective seems to be to
feminize utena and groom her because
utena is under the impression that she's
basically promised herself to the prince
from her childhood she is magnetically
drawn to him this naturally causes anthy
to Fester due to being so gaslit her
whole life that she feels her only sense
of value is to be of service to men
something that utena is interrupting and
the once best friends develop a toxic
rivalry I put a lot of poison in your
tea you don't say as one does the girls
appear to resolve their differences when
utena rescues anthy from an unal living
attempt and acknowledges that this is
kind of completely up after a
final stab at gaslighting utena into
believing that it's her time to shed her
juvenile boyish fantasies and be a
proper lady to be valuable to him and
presumably by extension societ at large
utena challenges Akio to a duel for
anthy's fate Akio basically says that
the dueling rules are different now a
because he'll straight up murder her if
she loses and B because the dueling
Arena may or may not have existed and
may have been a hologram this whole time
but don't worry we've yet to hit the
summit of weird Mountain guarding anthy
from her brother utena is stabbed in the
back by anthy who upon the command of
her brother has accepted that it's
simply her role in life to suffer
according to a man who has been
domestically abusing his own sister for
who knows how long Akio claims that she
has chosen this and that she's happy
like this and now she actually enjoys
living in this pathetic tortured role
she can no longer be happy except like
this looking at real world parallels a
given individual can endure much less
debilitating physical and psychological
trauma and be ruled as unfit by the
state to make their own decisions there
are a number of other hints and
instances in the plot that strongly
indicate that anthy's willpower is so
eroded that she has no sense of
self-preservation whatsoever and is
emotionally stunted to the point where
she needs people to make decisions for
her because she does not know how to
think for herself something that utena
has been trying to get her to realize
about herself this whole time with anthy
being stabbed by the swords of hatred
probably men's hatred it's symbolic or
not we'll talk about it Akio takes the
sword from utena and tries to open the
door that guards the power to
revolutionize the world and finally oops
it broke not that it really matters what
can you possibly get for the man who has
everything Whiskey
Stones it's not like any of this really
mattered it's fine Lenna meanwhile
desperately claws at the rose thorns
that guard the power of revolution in a
sheer refusal to give up on anony for
which I'm sure there's a heterosexual
explanation somehow and in a final
attempt to free anony from the cofin of
her psyche the floor gives out and utena
is left wounded defeated and at the
mercy of all the swords that Akio forced
upon anthy so that they would not attack
him Flash Forward a few weeks and utena
is not in school and all of the students
have begun to forget her save for anthy
and AIA the latter is disappointed that
utena never managed to use the power to
revolutionize the world and begins a new
scheme to try it all again anthy however
declares that she'll have no part of
this and next to a bewildered brother
announces that she's leaving otori
Academy to find aenna the manga and the
movie have some vast differences but
maintain the overall themes this is
primarily going to cover the anime but
will include some elements of the movie
in order to elaborate on themes because
on top of what I just narrated there's a
whole mythology and some magic realism
and anmy in general that is going on at
the same time and specifically in the
realm of magic realism the sword of Dos
dos himself the upside down Castle
anthy's magic and backstory as a witch
and just a whole lot more I am going to
drop some bombs because my reading of
revolutionary girl Lenna seems to be
vastly different than the bulk of the
discourse I have found not to mention
the actual Wikipedia page and sure you
could take it literally you could assume
that Doos was the former incarnation of
AIO who was transformed SL imprisoned by
anthy who is a witch a damsel in
distress and also simultaneously the
vesage of all men's hatred who
desperately want Prince Doos to deflower
their daughter and that's not outside
the realm of normal for anime or we can
observe revolutionary girl Lieutenant as
a deeply allegorical and symbolic story
about the struggles of coming of age
amidst widespread institutional
corruption in a high school and which
describes a passive culture of inaction
in regard to Brazen instances of
domestic exploitation in which there is
not only a question about the capore
reality of the events transpiring but
also which events can be taken for
granted and which events are meant to
signify abstract sociological
institutions which may be otherwise
difficult to articulate in fiction which
is quite frankly a lot more effort but
unfortunately we have postmodernism so I
guess we have to
[Music]
try postmodernism is a literary artistic
and philosophical school of thought
something something Wikipedia uses big
words what you need to know is that
postmodernism is a response to the
modernism movement which hit its peak in
the 1920s it's complicated there was a
lot of overlap especially when looking
at areas of study which began to shift
away from the modernist movement
architecture was the first area to
significantly adapt a style that would
be referred to as postmodern in contrast
to the modernists postmodernism is
rooted heavily in relativism and
implores a rejection of stable and
concrete let alone Universal truths due
to the focus around ephemerality
identity and especially the ways that
identity may be concealed or altered in
a world which is chronically changing
revolutionary girl lutena conforms
miraculously to this school of thought
and quite frankly it seems to be a
shining Exemplar of presenting these
tenants in a way that is clear though
compelling enough to be more than just a
textbook case this is considered one of
the most significant and influential
animes of the '90s for a very good
reason now it's easy to see how this
anime fits into a postmodern framework
from the theme alone you've got a bunch
of teenagers who are not only struggling
with ways to project their true selves
into the world but also struggling to
reconcile what that true self even is
there is an ongoing discussion about
gender developing sexuality Coming of
Age direct and indirect challenges to
establish values a question of Truth
Versus illusion a distrust of therapy
that feels at home with Scientology and
ultimately a threat of losing oneself in
a sea of modernity that's lowercase
modernity by the way prominent in
postmodern writing are unreliable
narrators imagery of mirrors masks being
trapped in Lial spaces a use of glitter
to describe seemingly important things
of little value and a strong prominence
of feminist ideals and themes given the
post-modernism not to be confused with
postmodernity which is a different thing
kind of seems to hold a particular focus
on the appearance versus reality of
something and also challenging the
belief of objective truth second W
feminism felt very at home when
post-modern thought made its way into
literature by the 19 60s the two could
often be spoken of in the same breath
they both Drew roots from the rise of
existentialist thought that endured the
second world war spurred by an
intellectual school of thought that
placed importance on the self and
developing a sense of self-worth based
on action rather than Birthright or
strictly through Labor also unfortunate
is that existentialism was a primary
influence for Aon Rand and her school of
objectivism still an ongoing Trend
within stories with a female lead was
that in order to frame The Narrative
towards emotional validation The
Narrative needed to contain the typical
post-modern elements of social
destabilization which leads us back to
utena where the very plot is about
Revolution and whether or not a
tomboyish young girl has the ability or
the right to be responsible for it but
you're here for the hot takes right what
does this have to do with that
throughout utena there is both an
element of magic realism juxtaposed
against the reality of High School drama
in spite of the fact that these are high
school students they fight Grand fencing
duels in a stadium in the sky where an
inverted Castle floats above the student
council has this anxious anticipation
about their ability to self-actualize an
anxieties about growing up while at the
same time carrying the kind of weight
and Authority one would expect from
feudal politics it's like Game of
Thrones with Minik skirts in my reading
of otna there is very little that we can
verifiably say is not symbolic or
directly allegorical of something this
anime incorporates nearly every
significant icon of postmodern language
it would be wrong to assume that this is
not deeply allegorical what have we just
going to take the doo stuff seriously
when it serves the plot much more
significantly to say that the background
mythology is meant to characterize the
way these characters interact my reading
of this media is that there isn't a
whole lot we can take at face value and
much much more that we can assume is
Fantastical illusion meant to convey
deeper meaning about what the author has
to say about power abuse control
schooling and Adolescence in general
especially because the final two
episodes strongly imply even
misleadingly that everything Fantastical
about this story from the duels the
castle the power of Doos was an illusion
projected by Holograms though in the
same breath where AIO explains that
people see a castle because they're too
naive to see the power of the Chairman's
residence they see the more literal
power of a castle Akio doesn't seem to
question himself at all and whether or
not the Chairman's office is an illusion
he is choosing to see in a discourse on
power it's very heavily implied that the
Chairman's Authority is representative
of a broader definition of higher
authority evidence of his own
self-deception is that he too buys into
the fantasy of the power of Doos which
seems to reside exclusively in this room
of Illusions and therefore where he
failed to breach the door to that power
with a sword he drew from utena's chest
utena accomplishes this all on her own
so if we are dealing with a plot that is
primarily an
illusion then how are we supposed to
interpret what was going on at all and
more importantly what does it all mean
[Music]
the weird thing about an analysis like
this is that you kind of have to gauge
what this anime is actually about before
you begin to look for supporting
instances something tricky about utena
is that some things are allegorically
coded and other things are meant to be
taken a face value it's not always clear
which is meant to be which a basic
premise is that uten atenu is a middle
school student who is struggling to
navigate adolescence if we assume that
this is is real as the more Universal
experience that a young lady can expect
in her life then all elements outside
the realm of normal can be seen as
symbolic reflections of struggles that
middle school students will go through
especially because all discourse around
the duels and the rosebride and the
floating Castle in the Sky are not
accessible to most of the student body
only the student council and a handful
of students know about these things the
rest of the students are
just students this creates a broad yet
clearly defined separation between the
Fantastical events events and the
literal ones and this is also primarily
why I prefer the anime to the movie The
separation between reality and illusion
is a little bit more defined whereas in
the movie adolescence of utena students
participated in these duels as the
audience it makes the symbolism of
everything around anthy a little bit
more literal except when you get to the
whole cars thing that said the movie was
much less about the question of identity
and more about escaping the oppressive
elements of conformity in school the
movie itself I view as more of a compan
piece to the anime beefing up secondary
thematic messaging that was present in
the anime and clarifying some character
motivations for instance toa's romantic
feelings for utena were genuine and that
shiori really is just that that bad
though utena's revamped design was a
great Improvement I felt granted the
whole movie is just gorgeous painting
the school as an mcer esque prison of
militant Conformity it's also just a lot
gayer there's a reason why I chose to
focus on the anime specifically both the
film and the manga are worth their own
analysis each the only major overlapping
symbol is that cars represent adulthood
and passage into adulthood a problem
with postmodern analysis is that
symbolic language and what is presented
as real events can often be overlapping
an element of realism is important in
most stories as most audiences need
these real events to identify within
their own lives in order to empathize
with the characters there is a degree of
uncertainty when gauging analysis and
the temptation to assume that everything
is symbolic which I feel gives a lot of
undo complexity to work that is
otherwise meant to just be
straightforward to bring up an example
nobody's going to expect and I mean
nobody look at the music video for
Wrecking Ball by Miley Cyrus I do like
Miley but this one was a bit of a Miss
she responded to criticism of the video
describing it as weird and unnecessary
by claiming that the whole Lick in the
hammer thing was symbolic of a failed
relationship or something a problem with
the video is that it is under the
assumption that the audience is going to
read these visuals as symbolic without
the music video itself doing anything to
suggest that these things are symbolic
the lyrics also don't do a whole lot to
play off of the housebreaking imagery of
a wrecking ball besides that one line
the end result is a weird sexual trist
with inanimate construction site objects
which seems to be playing off of nothing
but the song but that's a Creator
assuming that Their audience will read
symbolism into their work without prompt
it can work in the other direction too
taking Lord of the Rings as an example
and this is entirely hypothetical it
would be like saying that Aragorn
kicking the orc helmet and crying out in
anguish is symbolic of his rejection of
Regal responsibilities resulting in the
suffering of those around him no he's
kicking a helmet because he's frustrated
that he's misplaced his Hobbits and
screaming because vgo mortson
accidentally broke his foot kicking that
helmet now if the plot made a specific
point of Aragorn repeatedly kicking or
pushing objects away from him with due
consequences then yes we could say that
this action carries symbolic weight but
only only if it's repeated and only if
through repetition the audience can see
evolution in Aragorn's internal conflict
and unfortunately there aren't any solid
rules about when we should observe an
action or element as symbolic and when
we should dismiss it as taken for
granted because if you want to establish
a rule then some author at some point in
history has made a masterpiece textbook
example of a symbolic device that breaks
that rule the primary reason that AI
will never be able to replace artists is
because the collection of values that
are used to present literary devices can
shift from one artist to the next it's a
matter of Merit to have the kind of
creative judgment to discern how an
audience will interpret literary devices
and in the language of each individual
author there is a variable ability to
present meaning in variable ways using
variable methods tldr if there's a rule
then it would not be art the quality of
an artist is gauged by their ability not
only to make their own rules but to
efficiently project that set of rules to
Their audience we live in a world world
where Watchmen carry slaughterhouse 5
and The Color Purple are all considered
post-modern masterpieces yet their
syntactic mechanics narrative structure
and even their very underlying
philosophies are foundationally
different though in utena there seems to
be one side character who is able to
appropriately frame the realism from the
symbolism though she's in less than
about half of the total episodes utena's
best friend wakaba is the most important
character for Discerning what is meant
to be symbolic wakaba is a regular girl
whose incredibly gay and not at all
involved in the component of dueling
that takes place in the school wakaba
sees conflict between the dualists but
not the duels themselves she's the
cipher character with whom the audience
can appreciate what the average student
would see I would argue that whatever
wakaba sees is what the audience can
take for granted is the reality of
what's transpiring everything else
including very personal moments such as
anthy's attempted unal living and even
including things that happen in the real
world such as school teacher sexual
exploiting his female students can be
read as symbolic representations of
something more abstract and even if we
do read those aformentioned issues as
real that doesn't also mean that they
can't carry additional symbolic value to
a larger abstract concept they're just
very well-developed Concepts and because
of wakaba we can approach them with
uncertainty rather than confusion this
is the principle of my thoughts on
Attack on Titan where I felt that things
that fans and detractors argued were
symbolic were just too messy and
inconsistent and contradictory to be set
in stone allegories okay this is a world
where people can get bone marrow
injections and turn into giant monsters
who depending on the circumstances may
or may not have sentient reasoning based
on an ambiguous rule of genetic Heritage
but also magic 2 at this point if
anything goes World building Attack on
Titan goes out of its way to establish
that weird happens in this world
and can be accepted as fact rather than
allegory whereas revolutionary girl
lutena does not do that which is
something something you could accept
about utena except for wakaba who yes
participates in one duel but she was
brainwashed and has no recollection of
it wakaba is the element ofnormal in
this cast things that happen in her
awareness are certain wakaba is like us
the audience we don't pull Weaponry out
of random people or have uncommon hair
colors I'm sorry almost none of us are
main characters in an anime and
therefore what happens outside of waba's
awareness is subject to discourse on
Truth or Illusion because of wakaba we
can read some of the more weird things
in this plot as symbolic and not just
absurd not that utena doesn't have some
absurd things but even something
seemingly benign and uselessly cute like
cho cho serves to help characterize
anthy as a sympathetic character who is
earnest in her sensitivity rather than
at being a front to help her brother
groom girls at the school cares about
animals is the tried andrue method in
anime of signifying that the audience
ought to empathize with a given
character okay Mr we're studying
so so I'll have to see you later did you
like eating that mean old snake but
there's a lot more to dig into than
simple
[Music]
symbology probably the most prominent
symbol in the entire show is the sword
of dios aside from being the key that
gives access to the power of Revolution
it is made symbolic by how it is
acquired it being removed from anthy's
chest can be read as symbolic rather
other than your average magical girl
transformation stock footage it's very
easy in any work of fiction to observe
weapons as symbols of power this is
almost Universal what's a little more
creative is when a Creator questions
what a weapon is so given that a small
yet significant collection of the
student body run around spontaneously
pulling swords out of their chesticles
this isn't something that we can really
dismiss the power to revolutionize the
world is hidden behind a gate for which
the sword of Dos is the key to access in
order to get this power dualists usually
men need to extract this power from the
body of a woman however they do not
possess this power on their own they
need a woman as an accessory to their
Ambitions even if the ambition is to
protect the woman granted it probably
should not get lost on us that dios
means god in Latin and a number of other
romance languages even in the Japanese
language versions he's called dios and
I'm not going to get too deep into that
especially with the language of
apocalypse and Revolution that's a whole
master's degree dissertation right there
however the figure of Dio as a character
is important to the plot and in my
opinion a rather contentious one a
surface level reading of Doos is that he
is either a god a reflection of a god a
prince who died ages ago or a collection
of household insects given material form
by anthy depending on the version of
your story now yes if you want to you
can look at him like that and that who
he was is now a spectre that resides in
the sword Andor Castle he is the figure
who gave utena her signant ring and
inspired her to become a prince and he
is not AIO though can be read as and is
occasionally a reflection of AIO for all
that dios is approached with the
language of the Christian God akio's
name is derived from a Japanese
character used in the name for Venus the
Morning Star which is associated with
Lucifer Lucifer which is dare I say a
misappropriated name for Satan Lucifer
instead originally referred to a Persian
God Of The Morning Light and Satan
actually means the accuser not the devil
he was God's prosecutor not his enemy
Frenemies but anyway religion and anime
fun so yes the literal reading is there
but that's boring when there's so much
symbolism of foot dios is simply more
useful as a tool to explain the
motivations of characters that do exist
than as a character himself when a
character is a character but is not a
character but represents an internal
character foil that prends to their
identity that may be a figurative mask
but a mask nevertheless so dos doesn't
exist not strictly he exists as a
concept given a name the concept cept is
nobility chivalry and power the subject
of nobility is also noteworthy in utena
the prince of roses as a concept seems
to hold a different meaning to each
character to aenna the prince is the
archetype of the nobility she wants to
represent one may even say a transition
icon if you want to adopt that reading
of utena however additional instances of
castles princesses damsels and evil
witches also enrich this symbolic
language the castle may be an illusion
kind of AIO says it is but then hinges
his entire plan on breaking open an
illusion door so
I don't
[Music]
know the castle itself represents a
curious element of the story's Politics
on gender the final leg of the third Arc
heavily deals with AIO attempting to
convince utena to put down the sword and
be a proper lady which utena feels
compelled to do nearly everyone who sees
the upside down Castle wants to go there
to make all their dreams come true
whatever those dreams may be it makes it
easy for someone like Akio to manipulate
others under the promise that he can
make those dreams a reality what's
noteworthy is that the castle is
tantalizing but it's also inaccessible
it is in fact only accessible through
engagement to the Rose bride the reality
of this Castle is challenged by two
things first yes that Akio claims that
it's an illusion an illusion within an
illusion one could say very Inception
but also that it is upside down we know
from the study of symbols that when a
given symbol is inverted it holds an
opposite meaning take a castle what does
it represent monarchy regality nobility
safety and fantasy a castle as a symbol
if inverted still carries those values
but instead becomes an ironic subversion
of those values it's the difference
between saying a castle wall is meant to
keep the bride safe or maybe that it's
meant to keep her imprisoned an inverted
Castle says the latter it's also
significant that as utena faces Akio in
this climactic confrontation she begins
to understand the ways that her
childhood fantasies of princes and
princesses have been used to manipulate
her into being just a girl her
realization is marked by the upside down
Castle's collapse the symbolic language
of this Castle is a bit different in
adolescence of utena while it seems to
be a grand magnificent Castle it's
actually a giant tank underneath whose
shifting wheels and Treads form a
labyrinth that one is not meant to
escape and in the movie as in the anime
AIO is directly related to this castle
and the princely figure of Doos this
becomes more significant through the
third Arc to AIO dos uniquely represents
who he believes he is and who he feels
other people ought to see him as an
illusion he himself buys into so
strongly that others also believe it
Dio's story is told several different
ways by several different characters and
no story is entirely consistent the
common Trend in his Fable however is
that he has a sister he seeks a damsel
in distress and that he is tricked by a
witch and imprisoned all of these
figures are anthy at the same time Dio's
imprisonment Andor death as a result of
the witch's actions even though her
motivations range from malicious to
oblivious seems to be what every version
of this story frames as the root cause
for all the world's problems the world
still hadn't Fallen completely Into
Darkness then the reason for this was
because there was a rose Prince not only
is Akio a victim for having his God
could removed but the whole of the world
is worse off for it and that through his
intention to use the power of Revolution
he will re-empower himself to his
rightful status as someone
who has the ability to do anything he
wants without
consequences which is going to make the
world a better place because returning
his power to him is Poetic Justice
returning to him something that he lost
and all of this has been to say that the
role of dios is for Akio to betray his
internal motivations to the audience it
is her punishment for taking the prince
away from the girls of the world so
through a postmodern lens we can use
this to characterize AIO to offer
context for his actions in his mind he
is dios and his version of dios offered
himself to the world and the world's
princesses and the world was better for
it within the shadow play there is
language to suggest that he had the
ability to fight monsters to protect
people in akio's elaboration later on in
the same episode it subtly implied that
Doos gets power from deflowering the
princesses of the world and by the wi
taking away his unbridled ability to get
his dick wet he lost his ability to
maintain peace and order in the world
his exploitation of anthy in that light
is a means by which he can recover the
power he perceives she stole from him in
the most postmodern way possible this is
what I mean when I said that this might
not even be literal exploitation because
this kind of demonstration can be
extrapolated to indicate any kind of
power and balance in this relationship
this can signify any kind of control or
abuse but the instance of exploitation
here is used because assault has Deep
Roots as indicating that akio's gender
is the source of his imbalance however
there is also an invitation to observe
this conflict of princes damsels and
witches as itself representative of a
greater cultural hole the plot outlines
that exploitation of all kinds is
damaging not just the sexual instances
outlined here and how in the situation
of a life's worth of gaslighting someone
can actively believe that their only
role in life is to be a victim people
generally feel good when they are
reassured of their self existing in the
world when you have been told that
yourself is to be a victim over time
your brain can cross those wires
suddenly victimhood feels good because
you get that positive reassurance
dopamine hit ane's Conformity to the
Rose bride is based around the fact that
she feels good being subservient because
this is the only thing in her life that
has ever brought her any kind of
positive reward it takes the entire
series iies for utena to shake her out
of this mindset and she begins to see
herself as her own person and the really
cool thing is that we're now at a point
of analysis where we can get to the
exciting stuff because the language of
plurality it can apply to these
characters themselves so that we're not
just talking about AIO anthy and oena
but the ways that AIO is a standin for
every man and that Ane represents every
victim and that utena represents a kind
of a woman so we arrive at a game state
where men seek the power of Revolution
to facilitate their control over women
which they already have mostly in order
to return to times when things were
better lacking the freedom to commit
sexual exploitation to AIO and therefore
men like him impedes their ability to
properly manage the world and keep
everything safe this power that was once
exclusively theirs they perceive was
stolen from them by the women who they
are already exploiting utena's role is
to signify a new kind of woman this
woman cannot be defeated by the
traditional means and therefore the
method of dealing with them is to remove
their power by feminizing them and
ultimately groom them to accept their
own exploitation and that's just what
you get from the end of the world stuff
which is probably one of the weirder
parts of aenna until you get to the
turning into cars thing but I digress
there's a lot more that aenna has to say
about power Truth Versus illusion
schooling adolescence
in conjunction with other symbols and
themes like the upside down castle and
the power of
[Music]
Revolution this is about the
Revolutionary girl utena after all which
is strange because for all that the
language of revolution is dangled over
her head she seems to reject it power
structure itself is something all
versions of utena seems to discuss and
seem to come to a singular conclusion
that the objective of those in power is
to facilitate their control by crafting
the Next Generation into drones and this
is clearest in the movie The power
Brokers don't need to get their hands
dirty when they can just organize an
increasingly complicated schedule of
duels to sick the students onto each
other another reading of AIO outside of
Doos in the revolution is that his
surname is otori which is different from
his sister's Hima otori being the same
name as the academy again rather than a
singular individual he could represent a
broader scope of authority figures in
school ring institutions this could
range from statutory malice to Mere
unprofessionalism I mean there is a lot
more to utena than AIO I'm sorry if my
focus is here at the expense of spending
basically no time talking about nomy oh
this can't be I was so close to becoming
the idol of the school I can't seem to
think clearly anymore am I having
delusions do I need my appendix
removed bring me a blanket someone and
S shut up girl needs help I'm sure that
whole ordeal is symbolic for something
anyway the ability of a single element
of the show to function in a myriad of
ways with multiple applications speaks
to the Creator's credit even if and this
is often the case with authors many of
these meanings were unintended an
authorial ability to deconstruct the
world into a collection of symbols that
have this kind of universality showcases
a Savvy and insightful creative team
however there is something thus far
this is a show called The Revolutionary
girl utena what is this Revolution and
how is utena the one to be revolutionary
if she spends most of the anime trying
to prevent others from using Revolution
the use of revolution in the show is
only slightly different from how we
would use it it's not something like the
retirement of the French aristocracy a
nation becoming independent from a
parent state or even say Bernie Sanders
attempting to impose a tax structure in
America that's similar to what existed
in the 1960s Revolution itself in utena
seems to be an object one would use
revolution the same way you would use a
toaster and those who know that the
power of Revolution resides at otori
Academy seem to be desperate to use it
but even though they talk about
Revolution as if it were a power or a
tool the language of postmodernism opens
up a number of possibilities for what
use revolution serves to the characters
to the plot and to the audience when the
characters talk about the power to
Revolution the world it means we little
media analysts that we are don't have to
look at it as a Kamehameha blast we can
approach it as a vaguely established and
largely undefined quality of being able
to bring about a significant change to
the world which helps establish the
deeper motivations of what each
character wants to use revolution to do
of course tied into this theme of
Revolution are Miracles and Eternity and
since I can't read or understand
Japanese I may be losing something in
the translation because miracle are
often associated with Christian imagery
instead I think the plot is much more in
line with Alan Moore's sense of Miracles
a miracle is a thing that shouldn't be
possible but is in utena Miracles seem
to be things that afford a false sense
of hope the cynical believe this thing
is impossible even if it is actually
true this is the primary driving element
of jwy who is in love with her ex bestie
and considers it an impossibility that
this little psycho would ever
reciprocate those feelings the hope that
she might or that she could
is the source of jory's toxicity which
leads to jory's deeper motivation she
wants to eliminate miracles from the
world she wants to use revolution to
purge herself of Hope which is a
recurring pattern with all dualists
their intended uses for the power of
Revolution are self-directed yes seonji
desperately wants the long-term and
stable affection of a subservient woman
namely anthy but even if these
intentions aren't specifically malicious
a character like Mickey wants to use
eternity to preserve and protect an an
though only for him to use as a muse to
this he needs to first take control of
her whereas utena's motivations are to
liberate anthy utena stands out because
not only does she have no use for
revolution she seems to reject it and
even imply that she doesn't really
believe in any of it her exclusive
motivation is to protect anthy from the
predatorial intentions of the other
dualists treating the duels as symbolic
depicts these conflicts as indicative of
the ways young people clash as they
develop identity though the student
council postures itself as a itical body
they do amount to a collection of young
people who are very nervous about their
future and questioning what role they
are going to have in the world having
the power to revolutionize the world
means that they can have a hand on the
wheel deliberate driving metaphor from
the student council's introductory
monologue it may seem like something a
villain would say to announce themselves
prepare for trouble make it double
however the more we begin to empathize
with the student council the more we
begin to see this monologue as a
desperate bid to take take control of
their anxieties if it cannot break out
of its shell the chick will die without
ever being born we are the chick the
world is our egg if we don't crack the
world's shell we will die without truly
being born liutenant Echoes a particular
anxiety of growing up in Japan in the
1990s when the nation was in one of the
worst Financial depressions in its
history to many it did feel like the end
of the world and discourse around
Revolution was not far off we'll get
more into that in an upcoming Evangelion
video I promise and if Japanese Youth of
the 9s got it anything like Millennials
of the late 2000s got it then it would
have seemed like the entire weight of
the world was imparted on their
shoulders to fix things all the while
the powers at be insisting that fixing
things was the responsibility of the
nation's youth simultaneously scolded
them for talking about upsetting The
Establishment values that led to these
hardships in the first place especially
towards the end of the second Arc
discourse around growing up takes a a
central role as a driving theme and then
suddenly we get the third season and
everyone is in cars and their shirts are
flying off and is Aio toga not
that AIO doesn't have these chaotic by
Vibes but what does a casual approach to
sexuality have to do with
[Music]
cars right so as indicated in an episode
where nm's younger boyfriend desperately
wants to be a grown-up so that he can
interact with women the way that he sees
older boy doing there is a single line
questioning when someone becomes an
adult the gang tosses around a few
things that signify the kind of
adulthood that they have in their mind
and one of them is driving a car and
then the third Arc becomes all about
driving cars where we see AIO basically
grooming the student body into helping
him indoctrinate utena these scenes can
be read as an older man ushering high
school students into adulthood at times
before they're ready but also certainly
on his terms and not theirs akio's
depiction of adulthood is suave
mysterious and sexy even though his
promises seem to ring adulthood there's
an unspoken reminder that they are in
his car even during the duel where each
respective Pretender bride is driving
around trying to vehicular manslaughter
Renna they are in his car they are not
in their own cars it's not until seonji
begins to question why toga is letting
himself be manipulated into being akio's
wingman that we see them in their own
vehicle with togga driving songji a
scene we can read as these two young men
breaking away from the patterns of
manipulation and oppression that have
been established by the adults in their
lives and that isn't to say that either
of these young men don't have a lot to
make up for but they have a better shot
at doing the right thing while cutting
their own path rather than being under
the tutelage of someone like Akio this
is doubled down on in the movie where
the student council members including
zongji appear at the end to help anthy
Escape so what is revolution in probably
the most post modern turn of events
that's never made clear what exactly is
this power that everyone wanted to use
abuse and exploit anthy Andor women in
general to get a hold of what made all
of this worth it especially because the
power is found in a castle in the sky
that is described as an illusion
generated by a holographic machine but
described by a character who is
routinely outlined as being unreliable
Akio as aformentioned was unable to
access the power of Revolution and not
because he didn't have the power of Doos
which took from utena after he had her
stabbed in the back he breaks the sword
of dios and Revolution remains
exclusively Out Of Reach This tracks
thematically because what honestly was
Akio going to give himself with
Revolution that he didn't already have
his entire plot to bewitch utena was
just to try and convince her to
relinquish Revolution to him but Dodges
the question whenever anyone asks him
what he wants to do power for power's
sake he was already doing a bang up job
at finding a horde of people to ship his
sister off to as the rosebride but
somehow his greatest desire and deepest
anxiety stemmed from losing control of
his sister especially to another man and
I can imagine the prospect of losing his
sister to a woman is nothing short of IM
mascula is this a good place to mention
that corrective rape is the most common
form of sexual assault imposed on
lesbians asexuals and transmen and it
means exactly what it sounds like and
while he may Express disappointment
utena for not being able to bring
Revolution to the world he's met with a
nasty surprise that the key to his
martyrdom is suddenly making decisions
for herself and worse yet using that new
power to leave him so we the audience
can easily interpret that as a victory
in spite of utena's apparent defeat that
yes she somehow did manage to use the
power of Revolution and she used it in
an impossible selfless way she liberated
her best friend from a toxic power
Dynamic she had with her family and for
those who know getting someone to
abandon a toxic family environment even
if it is emotionally and psychologically
damaging is next to Impossible many
people who try to separate a friend from
a toxic family end up having to abandon
their friendship to protect their own
mental health through a not so
allegorical reading we can say utena did
the same that ultimately in spite of her
bravado and nobility she had to throw in
the towel anime can show teenagers
saving the world from interdimensional
vampires all it once presenting a story
where a teenager can engage with deeply
toxic authority figures without
deep-seated emotional scars is always
going to be more unrealistic anthy's
final decision to leave the school and
find utena speaks to her acknowledgement
that she has been a participant in this
and that she wants to make things right
this also Echoes the Final Act of
adolescence of utena where she becomes
the literal vehicle of anthy's Escape
rather than the figurative vehicle in
the anime however this is a postmodern
reading which means this isn't utena
anthy and AIO but a new wave of
conventional women the suffering and
victimhood of all women and the
patriarchal values that oppress women
utena prophesies women and their
struggle to free themselves from
victimhood and how this uphill battle
will have casualties because in this
context we can appropriately examine one
of the more elusive Concepts eternity
which is spoken of frequently but has
even less elaboration than Revolution
does both eternity and Revolution are
said to exist in the upside down Castle
you'd think that eternity and the power
of Revolution would be contradictory
things and you'd be correct utena's
hidden driving force through the entire
plot is to reconnect with the prince who
gave her the signant ring it's implied
that the prince Akio showed her
something Eternal which she now seeks to
attain and Akio uses this to groom utena
into believing the Eternal thing she
seeks is a romance with her prince but
Akio was never the prince utna was
trying to
find it was her all along the signate
ring may have brought her closer to this
Prince however she was the prince she
was looking for though as more
information is revealed to aenna she
remembers that no it was not a rose
scented embrace the prince showed her he
showed her the witch Frozen in Time
bearing hateful swords in her body for
all of eternity and this is both
punishment and Justice this is how the
world must be the Witch and
anthy must bear this
hatred utena sees this as Injustice and
her vow to become a prince is not in
honor of the prince who rescued her her
bravado is not due to a pep talk from a
handsome man her drive to become a
prince her will her determination her
very driving motivation that she herself
does not remember is to free anony from
the swords of men who somehow believe
that all women are responsible for the
suffering of the world and that a
woman's only cont contribution in this
world is to endure suffering for the
benefit of a
man utena's princely Quest is not just
to rescue anthy but to rescue all the
damsels in distress to rescue all women
from
suffering by empowering
them to rescue
[Music]
themselves
la
[Music]
n n n
n